Dreddy aws/resource dependencies (#150)
aws-samples/cfn101-workshop: workshop/content/intermediate/templates/resource-dependencies/_index.md

* When you reference your security group, also note that the `Type` of the `SecurityGroups` property value is a _List of String_. How do you represent this value in YAML format?
* How can you [specify](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-attribute-dependson.html) that the creation of a resource should follow another resource?
{{% /expand %}}

{{%expand "Want to see the solution?" %}}

* Reference the Security Group's logical ID as a list item under the `SecurityGroups` EC2 instance resource property, by using the `Ref` intrinsic function. CloudFormation should then wait for the Security Group to be created first, and then initiates the Amazon EC2 instance creation.
* Modify the Amazon EC2 instance resource definition as shown next:

```yaml
  Ec2Instance:
    Type: AWS::EC2::Instance
    Properties:
      ImageId: !Ref LatestAmiId
      InstanceType: t2.micro
      SecurityGroups:
        - !Ref InstanceSecurityGroup
      Tags:
        - Key: Name

>           Value: Resource-dependencies-workshop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          Value: Resource-dependencies-workshop
```
```

Author: I will resolve this

* Security Group resource creation is initiated.
* Once the security group is marked as `CREATE_COMPLETE`, the EC2 instance resource creation starts.
* After successful completion of the EC2 instance resource creation, CloudFormation should initiate the creation of S3 bucket.

To get started, refer to the `resource-dependencies-challenge.yaml` template in the `code/workspace/resource-dependencies` directory: you will need to establish the resource dependencies as needed. Follow the above procedure to define the dependency, and verify stack events match the above series.

{{%expand "Need a hint?" %}}

> * How can you [reference](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference.html) the security group for your instance?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How can you [reference](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/intrinsic-function-reference.html) your security group in the `SecurityGroups` [property](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-instance.html#cfn-ec2-instance-securitygroups) of your EC2 instance?
* When you reference your security group, also note that the `Type` of the `SecurityGroups` property value is a _List of String_. How do you represent this value in YAML format?
```

* How can you [specify](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-attribute-dependson.html) that the creation of a resource should follow another resource?
{{% /expand %}}

> {{%expand "Need a solution?" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{%expand "Want to see the solution?" %}}
```

> * Reference the security group resource LogicalID in EC2 instance resource properties as a list under `SecurityGroups` using the `Ref` intrinsic function. Doing this CloudFormation automatically waits for the security group to be created first, and then initiates the EC2 instance creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Reference the Security Group's logical ID as a list under the `SecurityGroups` EC2 instance resource property, by using the `Ref` intrinsic function. CloudFormation should then wait for the Security Group to be created first, and then initiates the EC2 instance creation.
```

* Modify the EC2 instance resource definition as shown next:

```yaml
  Ec2Instance:
    Type: AWS::EC2::Instance
    Properties:
      ImageId: !Ref LatestAmiId
      InstanceType: t2.micro
      SecurityGroups:
        - !Ref InstanceSecurityGroup
```

> * Since there is no dependency between the EC2 instance and S3 bucket, use the `DependsOn` attribute, and provide the EC2 instance logical ID as a value for the `DependsOn` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Since there is no dependency between the EC2 instance and the S3 bucket, use the `DependsOn` attribute in the S3 bucket resource, and provide the EC2 instance's logical ID as a value for the `DependsOn` attribute.
```

* Add the `DependsOn` attribute for the S3 bucket resource as shown next:

```yaml
  S3Bucket:
    Type: AWS::S3::Bucket
    DependsOn: Ec2Instance
    Properties:
      BucketName: !Ref S3BucketName
```
{{% /expand %}}

> The full solution for this challenge is available in the `code/solutions/resource-dependencies/resource-dependencies-challenge.yaml` template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new stack, called `resource-dependencies-challenge`, with your updated `resource-dependencies-challenge.yaml` template, and verify stack events are shown as in the sequence mentioned earlier.

The full solution for this challenge is available in the `code/solutions/resource-dependencies/resource-dependencies-challenge.yaml` template.
```

### Cleanup

Follow the steps below to [delete the stacks](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/cfn-console-delete-stack.html) you created as a part of this lab:

1. Navigate to the [AWS CloudFormation Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/).
2. On the **Stacks** page in the CloudFormation console, select the `resource-dependencies-lab` stack.
3. In the stack details pane, choose **Delete** to delete the stack, and then choose **Delete stack** to confirm.
4. Repeat steps above to delete the other two stacks you created: `resource-dependencies-lab-dependson` and `resource-dependencies-lab-ref-getatt`.

> 5. Make sure to delete the stack created as part of the challenge lab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

4. Enter a stack name. For example, `resource-dependencies-lab`.
5. In the **Parameters** section, provide unique values for `BucketName` and `SNSTopicName` parameters. For more information, see [Bucket naming rules](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/bucketnamingrules.html). When ready, choose **Next**.
6. Choose to accept default values on the **Configure stack options** page; scroll to the bottom of the page, and choose **Next**.
7. In the **Review** page, scroll to the bottom and choose **Create stack**.

Refresh the page until you see the `CREATE_COMPLETE` status for your stack. Now, let’s review stack events, that should look similar to the image shown next:

![resource-dependencies-lab.png](resource-dependencies/resource-dependencies-lab.png)

Looking at stack events, you can see the creation of the `SNSTopic` and `S3Bucket` resources was initiated at the same time. Since there are no dependencies between the two resources, CloudFormation initiated the creation of both resources together.

> Now, think of an example scenario where you want the S3 bucket to be created first, and only after the bucket is successfully created, the SNS topic creation should start. This is where the use of the `DependsOn` attribute comes into play: you explicitly define the dependency on the `SNSTopic` resource, and provide the logical ID of the S3 bucket resource (i.e.,`S3Bucket` in the example above) as a value. In doing so, CloudFormation will wait for the S3 bucket creation to be completed before initiating the creation of the SNS topic. Let’s take a look!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, think of an example scenario where you want the S3 bucket to be created first, and only after the bucket is successfully created, the creation of your Amazon SNS topic should start. This is where the use of the `DependsOn` attribute comes into play: you explicitly define the dependency on the `SNSTopic` resource, and provide the logical ID of the S3 bucket resource (i.e.,`S3Bucket` in the example above) as a value. In doing so, CloudFormation will wait for the S3 bucket creation to be completed before initiating the creation of the topic. Let’s take a look!
```

* Open the `resource-dependencies-with-dependson.yaml` file.
* Update the content of the template as you follow along steps on this lab.

Copy and paste the template snippet shown next in the `resource-dependencies-with-dependson.yaml` file; in the next step, you will create a stack and review stack events:

```yaml
Parameters:
  BucketName:
    Description: Enter a unique name for S3 bucket.
    Type: String

  SNSTopicName:
    Description: Enter a name for SNS topic.
    Type: String

Resources:
  S3Bucket:
    Type: AWS::S3::Bucket
    Properties:
      BucketName: !Ref BucketName

  SNSTopic:
    Type: AWS::SNS::Topic
    DependsOn: S3Bucket
    Properties:
      TopicName: !Ref SNSTopicName
```

Follow the same steps as above to create a new stack using the `resource-dependencies-with-dependson.yaml` template file. Make sure to provide a different stack name, for example `resource-dependencies-lab-dependson`. Provide unique values for `BucketName` and `SNSTopicName` parameters, and create the stack.

This time, your stack events should look different:

![resource-dependencies-lab-dependson.png](resource-dependencies/resource-dependencies-lab-dependson.png)

> Now, let’s review the stack events for your new stack. You added the `DependsOn` attribute to the SNS topic resource in the template, and specified the logical ID of the S3 bucket resource. This resulted in CloudFormation creating the `S3Bucket` resource first, and the `SNSTopic` resource next. Note that when you will delete the stack, the resource that was created first will be the last one to be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let’s review the stack events for your new stack. You added the `DependsOn` attribute to the Amazon SNS topic resource in the template, and specified the logical ID of the S3 bucket resource. This resulted in CloudFormation creating the `S3Bucket` resource first, and the `SNSTopic` resource next. Note that when you will delete the stack, the resource that was created first will be the last one to be deleted.
```

Congratulations! You have now learned how to explicitly define resource creation order using the `DependsOn` attribute.

#### Lab 2

> In this lab, you will learn how CloudFormation handles resource dependencies when you describe a resource property that references the return value of another resource. You reference resource return values with intrinsic functions such as `Ref` or `Fn::GetAtt`, depending on your use case. As an example, see which available output values are available for an SNS [topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html#aws-properties-sns-topic-return-values) and for an S3 [bucket](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-s3-bucket.html#aws-resource-s3-bucket-return-values).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this lab, you will learn how CloudFormation handles resource dependencies when you describe a resource property that references the return value of another resource. You reference resource return values with intrinsic functions such as `Ref` or `Fn::GetAtt`, depending on your use case. As an example, see which available output values are available for an Amazon SNS [topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html#aws-properties-sns-topic-return-values) and for an S3 [bucket](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-s3-bucket.html#aws-resource-s3-bucket-return-values).
```

* Open the `resource-dependencies-with-intrinsic-functions.yaml` file.
* Update the content of the template as you follow along steps on this lab.

Paste the contents of the template snippet shown next in `resource-dependencies-with-intrinsic-functions.yaml` file:

```yaml
Parameters:
  SNSTopicName:
    Description: Enter a name for SNS topic.
    Type: String

  EmailAddress:
    Description: Enter an email address to subscribe to SNS topic.
    Type: String

  SecurityGroupName:
    Description: Enter a name for security group
    Type: String

Resources:
  SNSTopic:
    Type: AWS::SNS::Topic
    Properties:
      TopicName: !Ref SNSTopicName

  SNSTopicSubscription:
    Type: AWS::SNS::Subscription
    Properties:
      Endpoint: !Ref EmailAddress
      Protocol: email
      TopicArn: !Ref SNSTopic

  SecurityGroup:
    Type: AWS::EC2::SecurityGroup
    Properties:
      GroupDescription: Security group for CloudFormation lab
      GroupName: !Ref SecurityGroupName

  SecurityGroupIngress:
    Type: AWS::EC2::SecurityGroupIngress
    Properties:
      GroupId: !GetAtt SecurityGroup.GroupId
      IpProtocol: tcp
      FromPort: 80
      ToPort: 80
      CidrIp: 0.0.0.0/0
```

> There are four resources in the template snippet you pasted into your template: an [SNS topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html), an [SNS topic subscription](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-sns-subscription.html), an [EC2 Security Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-security-group.html), and a [SecurityGroupIngress](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-security-group-ingress.html). Note the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are four resources in the template snippet you pasted into your template: an Amazon SNS [topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html), an Amazon SNS [topic subscription](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-resource-sns-subscription.html), an Amazon EC2 [Security Group](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-security-group.html), and a [SecurityGroupIngress](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-ec2-security-group-ingress.html) resource. Note the following:
```

> * The logical ID of the SNS topic resource, `SNSTopic`, is referenced with `Ref` in the `TopicArn` property of the `SNSTopicSubscription` resource. This is because the `AWS::SNS::Topic` resource type returns the [Amazon Resource Name](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws-arns-and-namespaces.html) (ARN) of the SNS topic when you use the `Ref` intrinsic function: for more information, see [SNS topic return values](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html#aws-properties-sns-topic-return-values). This implies that CloudFormation waits for the creation of `SNSTopic` to complete before initiating the creation of `SNSTopicSubscription`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The logical ID of the topic resource, `SNSTopic`, is referenced with `Ref` in the `TopicArn` property of the `SNSTopicSubscription` resource. This is because the `AWS::SNS::Topic` resource type returns the [Amazon Resource Name](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws-arns-and-namespaces.html) (ARN) of the topic when you use the `Ref` intrinsic function: for more information, see Amazon SNS topic [return values](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-sns-topic.html#aws-properties-sns-topic-return-values). This implies that CloudFormation waits for the creation of `SNSTopic` to complete before initiating the creation of `SNSTopicSubscription`.
```

* Once the `SecurityGroup` resource is in `CREATE_COMPLETE` status, the creation of `SecurityGroupIngress` will start. Similarly, after the creation of `SNSTopic`**,** the `SNSTopicSubscription` resource creation will be initiated.
* Note that there are no dependencies between `SNSTopic` and `SecurityGroup` resources: this means that CloudFormation initiates the creation of both these resources in parallel.

Let’s create a stack, and verify this is the expected behavior. Use the AWS CloudFormation Console to [create a stack](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/cfn-console-create-stack.html) using the `resource-dependency-with-intrinsic-functions.yaml` template:

1. Navigate to the [AWS CloudFormation Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/).
2. From **Create stack**, choose **With new resources (standard)**.
3. Choose the **Template is ready** option. From **Specify template**, choose **Upload a template file**. Upload the `resource-dependencies-with-intrinsic-functions.yaml` template, and choose **Next**.
4. Enter a stack name. For example, `resource-dependencies-lab-ref-getatt`.

> 5. In the **Parameters** section, provide a unique name for the SNS topic, an email address for SNS Topic subscription, and a name for the security group; when ready, choose **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the **Parameters** section, provide a unique name for the Amazon SNS topic, an email address for Amazon SNS topic subscription, and a name for the security group; when ready, choose **Next**.
```

6. Choose to accept default values on the **Configure stack options** page; scroll to the bottom of the page, and choose **Next**.
7. In the review page, scroll to the bottom and choose **Create stack**.

Once the stack is created, your stack events should look like in the following example:

![resource-dependencies-lab-ref-getatt.png](resource-dependencies/resource-dependencies-lab-ref-getatt.png)

Let’s review stack events for your `resource-dependencies-lab-ref-getatt` stack. Note the creation of `SNSTopic` and `SecurityGroup` resources started in parallel, as both resources had no dependencies between each other. Also, note the `SecurityGroupIngress` resource creation started only after the `SecurityGroup` resource was in the `CREATE_COMPLETE` status, and the `SNSTopicSubscription` creation started after the `SNSTopic` resource was successfully created.

When you will delete your stack, CloudFormation follows creation order in reverse: in this case, for example, `SNSTopicSubscription` and `SecurityGroupIngress` resources will be deleted first, followed by `SecurityGroup` and `SNSTopic`.

{{% notice note %}}

> You should have received an email, sent to the email address you provided, for you to confirm the subscription to the SNS topic you created. Choose to follow the subscription link in the subscription confirmation email you received for the topic you created, to subscribe to your topic: otherwise, when you delete the stack, the subscription will be left in pending state and will not be deleted from your account. For more information, see [Deleting an Amazon SNS subscription and topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sns/latest/dg/sns-delete-subscription-topic.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should have received an email, sent to the email address you provided, for you to confirm the subscription to the Amazon SNS topic you created. Choose to follow the subscription link in the subscription confirmation email you received for the topic you created, to subscribe to your topic: otherwise, when you delete the stack, the subscription will be left in pending state and will not be deleted from your account. For more information, see [Deleting an Amazon SNS subscription and topic](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sns/latest/dg/sns-delete-subscription-topic.html).
```
